---
layout: post
title: Leetcode
categories:
- blog
---

### 380. Insert Delete GetRandom O(1)
Design a data structure that supports all following operations in average O(1) time.
1. insert(val)
2. remove(val)
3. getRandom

Consider 3 possible data structure:  
1. LinkedList: insert and remove are O(1), but for getRandom, we have to iterate to a random node which takes O(n)
2. HashMap: insert and remove are O(1), but can't get a random number from it.
3. ArrayList: insert and getRandom are O(1), but remove takes O(n) because of shifting.

We can consider a combination of ArrayList and HashMap. To find the index of the value to be removed in O(1), we can use a HashMap to store the value and its corresponding index. To avoid shifting caused by remove(), we can just move the last element to replace the removed one, since we don't care the order. 

### 146. LRU Cache
Design and implement a data structure for Least Recently Used (LRU) cache. It should support the following operations:   
1. get(key)
2. put(key, value)

It's natural to think of LinkedList which is fast to insert and delete a node.  
For get(), we need to find the node and move it to the front.  
For put(), we also need to find the node and update it or create a new node and move it to the front. If it reaches the capacity, we need to delete the oldest node at the end.  
LinkedList takes O(1) to delete and insert a node. But it takes O(n) to find the node. To improve the performance to O(1), a HashMap can store the mapping between the key and the node.  
However, to delete a node, we have to know the previous node. Doubly linked list can solve the problem, but a more concise way is to store the mapping between the key and the previous node.   
Therefore, a **LinkedList and a HashMap** can implement the get and put operation in **O(1)**.  
LinkedHashMap can help.  


### 4. Median of Two Sorted Arrays
<https://leetcode.com/problems/median-of-two-sorted-arrays/description/>

{% highlight java %}
public double findMedianSortedArrays(int[] nums1, int[] nums2) {
    int n = nums1.length + nums2.length;
    
    // odd number
    if ((n & 1) == 1) {
        return findKth(nums1, 0, nums2, 0, n / 2 + 1);
    }
    
    // even number
    return (findKth(nums1, 0, nums2, 0, n / 2) + findKth(nums1, 0, nums2, 0, n / 2 + 1)) / 2.0;
}

// find the kth smallest number in the two arrays
private int findKth(int[] nums1, int start1, int[] nums2, int start2, int k) {
    if (start1 >= nums1.length) {
        return nums2[start2 + k - 1];
    }
    
    if (start2 >= nums2.length) {
        return nums1[start1 + k - 1];
    }
    
    if (k == 1) {
        return Math.min(nums1[start1], nums2[start2]);
    }
    
    int half1 = Integer.MAX_VALUE;
    int half2 = Integer.MAX_VALUE;
    
    if (start1 + k / 2 - 1 < nums1.length) {
        half1 = nums1[start1 + k / 2 - 1];
    }
    
    if (start2 + k / 2 - 1 < nums2.length) {
        half2 = nums2[start2 + k / 2 - 1];
    }
    
    if (half1 > half2) {
        return findKth(nums1, start1, nums2, start2 + k / 2, k - k / 2);
    } 
    
    return findKth(nums1, start1 + k / 2, nums2, start2, k - k / 2);
}

{% endhighlight %}

---

### 50. Pow(x, n)
<https://leetcode.com/problems/powx-n/description/>

Recursive method is relatively easy. Lets discuss about the iterative one.  
Let's consider the exponent n in binary representation. Say, n = 9

`9 = (1001)2 = 2 ^ 3 + 2 ^ 0`

Therefore, pow(x, 9) equals  
`x ^ 9 = x ^ (2 ^ 3 + 2 ^ 0) = (x ^ (2 ^ 3)) * (x ^ (2 ^ 0))`    

So if **ith** bit is 1, we multiply the ans by `x ^ (2 ^ i)`. (the least significant is 0th)   
For `i = 0, 1, 2, ...`, we multiply the ans by `x ^ 1, x ^ 2, x ^ 4, x ^ 8, ...`

{% highlight java %}
public double myPow(double x, int n) {
    double ans = 1;
    if (n < 0) {
        x = 1 / x;
    }
    long absN = Math.abs((long)n);
    
    while (absN > 0) {
        if ((absN & 1) == 1) {
            ans *= x;
        }
        
        absN >>= 1;
        x *= x;
    }
    
    return ans;
}
{% endhighlight %}
Note:  
When calculating absolute values, be careful with the integer overflow. Turn it into long in advance.  

---
### 230. Kth Smallest Element in a BST
<https://leetcode.com/problems/kth-smallest-element-in-a-bst/>   

**Approach 1: Inorder Traversal - Iterative**    
    
**Time complexity:**    
O(max(k, h)), minimum time will be on average O(h) because we need to go all the way down to the leftmost node and then starting counting till k.   
**Space complexity**:   
O(h), h is height of the tree   

{% highlight java %}
public int kthSmallest(TreeNode root, int k) {
    Stack<TreeNode> stack = new Stack<>();
    TreeNode curr = root;
    while (curr != null) {
        stack.push(curr);
        curr = curr.left;
    }
    
    while (!stack.isEmpty()) {
        TreeNode node = stack.pop();
        k--;
        if (k == 0) {
            return node.val;
        }
        
        TreeNode ptr = node.right;
        while (ptr != null) {
            stack.push(ptr);
            ptr = ptr.left;
        }
    }
    
    return -1;
}
{% endhighlight %}

**Approach 2: Add a count field in node - recursive**   

If the BST is modified (insert/delete operations) often and we need to find the kth smallest frequently...     
O(k) is too slow in the case when k is closer to number of nodes.     
If we can reconstruct the node structure of the tree, we can add a count field to indicate the number of nodes in the node's subtree, including itself.    

**Time complexity**:   
kthSmallest(): O(h), h is the height of the tree, because each recursion we can go one level deeper by choosing left of right subtree.  
insert/delete operation: O(h), O(h) to find the right place to insert/detele and O(h) to update each upper level parent's count.   
**Space complexity**:   
O(1). (Not counting the space of the new tree because imagine we edit the original tree structure to include the count field in the first place)

{% highlight java %}
class Solution {
    public int kthSmallest(TreeNode root, int k) {
        Node newRoot = buildCountTree(root);
        return kthSmallest(newRoot, k);
    }

    private int kthSmallest(Node root, int k) {
        if (root.left != null) {
            if (root.left.count < k - 1) {
                return kthSmallest(root.right, k - root.left.count - 1);
            } else if (root.left.count == k - 1) {
                return root.val;
            } else {
                return kthSmallest(root.left, k);
            }
        } else if (k == 1) {
            return root.val;
        } else {
            return kthSmallest(root.right, k - 1);
        }
    }
    
    private Node buildCountTree(TreeNode node) {
        if (node == null) {
            return null;
        }
        
        Node root = new Node(node.val);
        root.left = buildCountTree(node.left);
        root.right = buildCountTree(node.right);
        
        if (root.left != null) {
            root.count += root.left.count;
        }
        if (root.right != null) {
            root.count += root.right.count;
        }
        return root;
    }
    
    private static class Node {
        int val;
        int count;
        Node left, right;
        
        Node(int v) {
            val = v;
            count = 1;
        }
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}